What happens when you type google.com in your browser and press Enter

Foreword
In our modern age, we use the internet for almost everything we do from smartphones to smart appliances. gone are those days when we need to travel around the world to communicate with friends and family overseas now it is done with just a click, we stream the latest music from our favorite artists, conduct virtual meetings and play games online in real-time all with the power of the internet.

The new world of the internet has enabled everyone to live a life of comfort, something that remains a mystery to most people. In this article, I want to bring you further into the digital world where I will explain how it works when we type anything on our web browser and hit enter to see what happens beneath the eye. Let’s dive into it.

Early concept

To visit any website you will need a web browser(Chrome, Firefox, Safari, etc.), a website consists of several web pages linked together under a common domain name. a web page is a hypertext document written using a Hypertext Markup Language(HTML) on the world wide web. This file is delivered by a computer that provides a service to store these files and waits on a call to deliver them when needed(Web Server) which is then displayed by a web browser.
There are various types of server and each one serve a different purpose. there is the application server that contains the application base code used to interact with web browsers and other applications. A database server also contains databases that can be updated and referenced as needed. The one that is of main concern to us in this article is the web server which serves web pages to the web browser.
These servers need a web address in other to deliver their content. This will allow a request-and-response relationship between the web server and the web browser. These unique addresses are called IP( Internet Protocol). An IP address always consists of 4 numbers separated by periods, with the numbers having a possible range of 0 through 255. (e.g. 192.168.1.10).
The servers send information to one another most often via two methods: Transmission Control Protocol(TCP) and User Datagram Protocol(UDP).
TCP is used to organize data in a way that guarantees secure transmission between servers and clients. Data sent over the network is guaranteed to be consistent, regardless of volume. For this reason, it is used to send data from other higher-level protocols where all sent data must arrive. It works with the Internet Protocol (IP), which defines how computers send packets of data to each other. Together, TCP and IP are the basic rules that define the internet. A server that uses TCP is known to send in packets and confirm the packets sent that’s why whenever there is an internet interruption and it comes back up the server knows where to continue cause it knows how many packets are yet to be downloaded.
The User Datagram Protocol, or UDP, is a communication protocol used across the Internet for especially time-sensitive transmissions such as video playback or DNS lookups. UDP is faster but less reliable than TCP because it does not check if its data are received or not, all it cares about is sending information. If you ever watch a live video and there is an interruption, you will stop seeing the content; and when it comes back on you will only receive the current broadcast. Those that play real-time video games would have to say bye-bye to the information lost.
Now, what happens…
When you type google.com or any other URL (Uniform Resource Locator) in your web browser and press enter. firstly, your browser looks up in the computing environment for any temporary data store(cache) to see if that website has been visited before and if the IP is known. If it can’t find the IP address for the URL requested then it asks your operating system to locate the website. Now the operating system starts looking for addresses on the URL you specified in the hosts’ file (c:\windows\system32\drivers\etc\host in Windows, /etc/hosts in Linux and Mac). if the URL is not found inside this file, then the OS will make a DNS request to find the IP Address of the web page. The process goes like this the Resolver (or Internet Service Provider) server looks up in its cache to see if it knows the IP Address, if the Resolver does not know then it asks the root server to ask the top-level domain (.COM TLD) server — if your URL ends in .NET then the TLD server would be .NET and so on — the TLD server will again check in its cache to see if the requested IP Address is there. if not, then it will have at least one of the authoritative names associated with that URL, and after going to the Name Server, it will return the IP Address associated with your URL. all this is done in milliseconds incredible.
Now the OS has the IP Address and gives it to the browser, it then makes a GET request( a type of HTTP Method) to the said IP Address. When the request is made the browser again makes the request to the OS which then, in turn, packs the request in the TCP traffic protocol we discussed earlier, and it is sent to the IP Address. On its way, it is checked by both the OS and the Servers firewall to make sure that there are no security violations. And upon receiving the request, the server(usually a load balancer that directs traffic to all available server for that website) send a response with the IP Address of the chosen server along with the SSL(Secure Sockets Layer) certificate to initiate a secure session(HTTPS). Finally, the chosen server sends the HTML, CSS, and Javascript files(If any) back to the OS who in turn gives it to the browser to interpret it. And then you get the website.

Conclusion
In the digital world, it’s good to know the complexity that takes place in order for us to be able to get a website, cause it all happens within a blink so understanding the whole process makes you feel better either as a user or a developer.

Thanks for reading!
